README.md, before:

# Digit Classifier

Application for Machine Learning Institute program. 

Objective: Build a MNIST digit Classifier. See https://programme.mlx.institute/interview/project

## Dev - running the app locally

### Prerequisites
Needed:
- Python (v3.9.6)
- Poetry for python package management (`brew install poetry` or see https://python-poetry.org/ to install. v2.1.3 or higher)
- [colima](https://github.com/abiosoft/colima) for using docker without needing Docker Desktop (`brew install colima`) 
    - For colima to work, install docker (`brew install docker`) 

### 1. Initial python set up
To run the digit_classifier python files:
1. Ensure poetry is using python v3.9.6 (see commands listed: https://python-poetry.org/docs/managing-environments/ - e.g. using `poetry env use 3.9`)
2. `poetry env activate` to use the poetry virtual environment created
    - (To deactivate virtual env if needed, run `deactivate`)
3. `poetry install` to install project requirements

### 2. Model service/API
Code for the model service/API can be found in `src/digit_classifier/model`
The model has been trained on the MNIST dataset. The code ensures that the model is usable by ensuring the model loss is < 0.5 and model accuracy is > 90% when testing on the MNIST testing dataset.
- To load the service locally, use `uvicorn digit_classifier.model.api:app --reload`.
    - This runs the backend on port 8000, to check it is up and running go to: http://localhost:8000/healthcheck to see a response.

### 3. PostgreSQL database
Code for the postgreSQL database set up and SQL queries can be found in `src/digit_classifier/database`
A postgreSQL database is used to log the feedback of the user, along with the prediction and confidence level. All entries to the database is displayed to the user on the frontend.
#### To set up and start the docker container
1. `colima start` to start up docker
    - To stop colima and the VM, run `colima stop`
2. Run `docker pull postgres` to get a PostgreSQL Docker image
3. Run `docker run --name postgres_container -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=<POSTGRES_PASSWORD> -d -p <DB_PORT>:<DB_PORT> -v postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data postgres` to run the PostgreSQL container
- Get the `.env` file from one of the Dev's (the only dev - Helen ;D) to get the `<POSTGRES_PASSWORD>` and `<DB_PORT>` values
- To verify the docker is up and running, run `docker ps`
This sets up the database within a docker container, and the frontend app will interact with using the [psycopg2 package](https://www.psycopg.org/docs/install.html#build-prerequisites)

#### To restart docker container
If you have previously run the above set up steps (you can verify that it Exited by running `docker ps -a` and seeing the docker container with the name `postgres_container`), you can restart the container by running `docker restart postgres_container`.
- To verify it is up and running, run `docker ps` and view status of `postgres_container`

### 4. Streamlit Front end
Code for the streamlit front end can be found in `src/digit_classifier/frontend`
To run front end locally, ensure the postgresSQL database docker container is up and running. Then run the script: `streamlit run src/digit_classifier/frontend/app.py` and it will create a localhost URL to view. 

#### To set up and start the docker container
1. To build the docker image named 'frontend' run `docker build --file Dockerfile.frontend -t frontend .`
2. To run the built image, run `docker run -p 8500:8500 frontend`
You should be able to see the app running here: http://127.0.0.1:8500

---

## Tasks
For full details, see: https://programme.mlx.institute/interview/project

Live example of the application: https://mnist-example.mlx.institute

1. ✅ **Train a PyTorch Model**
    - ✅ Develop a basic PyTorch model to classify handwritten digits from the MNIST dataset.
    - ✅ Train it locally and confirm that it achieves a reasonable accuracy.
2. ✅ **Interactive Front-End**
    - ✅ Create a web interface (using Streamlit) where users can draw a digit on a canvas or input area.
    - ✅ When the user submits the drawing, the web app should run the trained PyTorch model to produce:
        - ✅ Prediction: the model's guess at the digit (0–9).
        - ✅ Confidence: the model's probability for its prediction.
        - ✅ True Label: allow the user to manually input the correct digit so you can gather feedback.
3. ✅ **Logging with PostgreSQL**
- ✅ Every time a prediction is made, log these details to a PostgreSQL database:
    - ✅ Timestamp
    - ✅ Predicted digit
    - ✅ User-provided true label
4. **Containerization with Docker**
- Use Docker to containerize:
    - The PyTorch model/service
    - The Streamlit web app
    - The PostgreSQL database
- Use Docker Compose to define your multi-container setup in a docker-compose.yml file.
5. **Deployment**
- Set up a self-managed server (e.g., Hetzner's basic instance) or any other environment where you can install Docker and control the deployment end-to-end.
- Deploy your containerized application to the server and make it accessible via a public IP or domain.
6. **Add project to GitHub**
- Add your project to GitHub.
- Make sure to include a README with a link to the live application.
- Share the link to your GitHub repository with us via the application form.

## Resources
- Tutorial used to learn Machine learning on pytorch: # Tutorial to learn pytorch adapted from https://www.learnpytorch.io/03_pytorch_computer_vision/

Commit message:

Add a database API service that has a healthcheck endpoint and get records endpoint

README.md, after:

# Digit Classifier

Application for Machine Learning Institute program. 

Objective: Build a MNIST digit Classifier. See https://programme.mlx.institute/interview/project

## Dev - running the app locally

### Prerequisites
Needed:
- Python (v3.9.6)
- Poetry for python package management (`brew install poetry` or see https://python-poetry.org/ to install. v2.1.3 or higher)
- [colima](https://github.com/abiosoft/colima) for using docker without needing Docker Desktop (`brew install colima`) 
    - For colima to work, install docker (`brew install docker`) 

### 1. Initial python set up
To run the digit_classifier python files:
1. Ensure poetry is using python v3.9.6 (see commands listed: https://python-poetry.org/docs/managing-environments/ - e.g. using `poetry env use 3.9`)
2. `poetry env activate` to use the poetry virtual environment created
    - (To deactivate virtual env if needed, run `deactivate`)
3. `poetry install` to install project requirements

### 2. Model service/API
Code for the model service/API can be found in `src/digit_classifier/model`
The model has been trained on the MNIST dataset. The code ensures that the model is usable by ensuring the model loss is < 0.5 and model accuracy is > 90% when testing on the MNIST testing dataset.
- To load the service locally, use `uvicorn digit_classifier.model.api:app --reload`.
    - This runs the backend on port 8000, to check it is up and running go to: http://localhost:8000/healthcheck to see a response.

### 3. PostgreSQL database
Code for the postgreSQL database set up and SQL queries can be found in `src/digit_classifier/database`
A postgreSQL database is used to log the feedback of the user, along with the prediction and confidence level. All entries to the database is displayed to the user on the frontend.
#### To set up and start the docker container
1. `colima start` to start up docker
    - To stop colima and the VM, run `colima stop`
2. Run `docker pull postgres` to get a PostgreSQL Docker image
3. Run `docker run --name postgres_container -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=<POSTGRES_PASSWORD> -d -p <DB_PORT>:<DB_PORT> -v postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data postgres` to run the PostgreSQL container
- Get the `.env` file from one of the Dev's (the only dev - Helen ;D) to get the `<POSTGRES_PASSWORD>` and `<DB_PORT>` values
- To verify the docker is up and running, run `docker ps`
This sets up the database within a docker container, and the frontend app will interact with using the [psycopg2 package](https://www.psycopg.org/docs/install.html#build-prerequisites)

#### To restart docker container
If you have previously run the above set up steps (you can verify that it Exited by running `docker ps -a` and seeing the docker container with the name `postgres_container`), you can restart the container by running `docker restart postgres_container`.
- To verify it is up and running, run `docker ps` and view status of `postgres_container`

#### To run the database API
Run `uvicorn digit_classifier.database.api:appdb --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8001`, which will run it on localhost port 8001. Check http://localhost:8001/healthcheck for a response to see it up and running

### 4. Streamlit Front end
Code for the streamlit front end can be found in `src/digit_classifier/frontend`
To run front end locally, ensure the following are running:
- postgresSQL database docker container
- database API
- model service API
Then run the script: `streamlit run src/digit_classifier/frontend/app.py` and it will create a localhost URL to view. 

#### To set up and start the docker container
1. To build the docker image named 'frontend' run `docker build --file Dockerfile.frontend -t frontend .`
2. To run the built image, run `docker run -p 8500:8500 frontend`
You should be able to see the app running here: http://127.0.0.1:8500

---

## Tasks
For full details, see: https://programme.mlx.institute/interview/project

Live example of the application: https://mnist-example.mlx.institute

1. ✅ **Train a PyTorch Model**
    - ✅ Develop a basic PyTorch model to classify handwritten digits from the MNIST dataset.
    - ✅ Train it locally and confirm that it achieves a reasonable accuracy.
2. ✅ **Interactive Front-End**
    - ✅ Create a web interface (using Streamlit) where users can draw a digit on a canvas or input area.
    - ✅ When the user submits the drawing, the web app should run the trained PyTorch model to produce:
        - ✅ Prediction: the model's guess at the digit (0–9).
        - ✅ Confidence: the model's probability for its prediction.
        - ✅ True Label: allow the user to manually input the correct digit so you can gather feedback.
3. ✅ **Logging with PostgreSQL**
- ✅ Every time a prediction is made, log these details to a PostgreSQL database:
    - ✅ Timestamp
    - ✅ Predicted digit
    - ✅ User-provided true label
4. **Containerization with Docker**
- Use Docker to containerize:
    - The PyTorch model/service
    - The Streamlit web app
    - The PostgreSQL database
- Use Docker Compose to define your multi-container setup in a docker-compose.yml file.
5. **Deployment**
- Set up a self-managed server (e.g., Hetzner's basic instance) or any other environment where you can install Docker and control the deployment end-to-end.
- Deploy your containerized application to the server and make it accessible via a public IP or domain.
6. **Add project to GitHub**
- Add your project to GitHub.
- Make sure to include a README with a link to the live application.
- Share the link to your GitHub repository with us via the application form.

## Resources
- Tutorial used to learn Machine learning on pytorch: # Tutorial to learn pytorch adapted from https://www.learnpytorch.io/03_pytorch_computer_vision/
